Enhanced secretary bird optimization algorithm for enhanced DG deployment and reconfiguration in electrical distribution networks to improve power system efficiency.
Optimizing Distributed Generation (DG) placement and network restructuring in radial distribution systems can significantly enhance technical accomplishment and effectiveness in operations. This study introduces a Hybrid Secretary Bird Optimization (HSBO) algorithm, an enhanced version of the original SBO, specifically designed to address the challenges of multi-dimensional and complex optimization problems in such systems. The HSBO incorporates Cauchy mutation for improved exploration and opposition-based learning to ensure a diverse and representative initial population. The optimization technique aims to minimize a multi-objective function that considers active and reactive power losses and voltage deviations. The proposed algorithm is tested on 85-node, 141-node, and 415-node systems and compared with state-of-the-art optimization techniques, including the original SBO, golden jackal optimizer, and particle swarm optimizer. Assessments of performance are carried out under different voltage-dependent load models, including constant power, constant current, constant impedance, and composite loads. Additionally, a cost–benefit analysis assesses the economic benefits through quantifying the reduction in economic losses achieved through appropriate DG deployment and network reconfiguration. Results demonstrate the HSBO's superior performance in integrating DG units with optimal power factors and performing network reconfiguration. For the 85-node network, active power loss is reduced by 97.49%, reactive power loss by 98.14%, and voltage deviation by 98.86%. In the 141-node system, active power loss is reduced by 95.11%, reactive power loss by 95.44%, and voltage deviation by 87.02%. In the 415-node network, active power loss is reduced by 80.92%, reactive power loss by 79.77%, and voltage deviation by 76%.
